UPDATES
2022 CERT-In Directions on Reporting Cyber
Incidents
04 May 2022
Partners: Rahul Matthan, Nikhil Narendran, Jyotsna Jayaram, Counsel: Jishnu Sanyal, Senior Associates: Thomas J.
Vallianeth, Puja Saha, Associate: Shantanu Mathur
On 28 April 2022, the Indian Computer Emergency Response
The CERT-In has issued fresh
Team (CERT-In) issued new directions (2022 Directions) under
Section 70B (6) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) directions mandating
incorporating a host of cyber-security, breach reporting, and
compliances in relation to cyber
record maintenance requirements. In India, the CERT-In is
appointed as the national agency for performing various security incidents, ranging from
functions in the area of cyber security as per provisions of section
the requirement to report
70B of the IT Act. The CERT-In is also empowered to call for
incidents within six hours to
information and give directions to any service provider,
intermediary, data centre, body corporate and Government
storing system logs locally in
organisation. The 2022 Directions have been issued to augment
India. These directions are likely
incident response measures. This update provides a brief
overview of the new requirements imposed by the 2022 to bring sweeping changes to
Directions.
the law relating to cyber
1 Six Hour Timeline for Reporting and Expanded List of
security and data breaches in
Reportable Cyber Security Incidents
India.
The Information Technology (The Indian Computer
Emergency Response Team and Manner of performing
functions and duties) Rules, 2013 (CERT-In Rules) had not
prescribed a timeframe within which cyber-security incidents must be reported and only required reporting
within a reasonable time frame. The 2022 Directions, on the other hand, make this requirement more
stringent by requiring cyber security incidents to be reported within six hours of noticing or being brought to
notice of such incident to the CERT-In. Given the short time frame, organisations would need to reassess their
practices and procedures in relation to breach reporting, and ensure that appropriate organisational
capabilities are deployed in order to identify and report cyber security incident in this time frame.
Further, under the CERT-In Rules only those cyber security incidents specified as mandatorily reportable were
required to be reported. However, the 2022 Directions expand this list to include: (i) data breach; (ii) data
leak; (iii) attacks on Internet of Things (IoT) devices and associated systems, networks, software, servers; (iv)
attacks or incidents affecting digital payment systems; (v) attacks through malicious mobile apps; (vii)
unauthorised access to social media accounts; (viii) attacks or malicious/ suspicious activities affecting cloud
computing systems/servers/software/applications; (ix) attacks or malicious/suspicious activities affecting
systems/servers/networks/software/applications related to big data, block chain, virtual assets, virtual asset
exchanges, custodian wallets, robotics, 3D and 4D printing, additive manufacturing, drones; (x) attacks or
malicious/suspicious activities affecting systems/servers/software/applications related to Artificial Intelligence
2022 CERT-In Directions on Reporting Cyber Incidents Page 1
UPDATES
and Machine Learning. There is no clarity on the specifics of what these incidents entail, and no impact
threshold has been specified presently.
2 Information Requests
Under Rule 14 of the CERT-In Rules, the CERT-In can seek information from regulated entities in specified
formats and time frames for responding to cyber incidents, however this power could only be exercised by an
officer of the rank of Deputy Secretary or higher. The 2022 Directions however prescribe a broad ranging
power to call for information without any such safeguards.
3 Maintenance of System Logs within India
The 2022 Directions require entities to maintain logs for all their information and communications technology
(ICT) systems for 180 days and to store these logs in India. These logs are also required to be provided to CERT-
In while reporting a cyber incident, or when sought by CERT-In pursuant to a direction. At present there is no
clarity on what these logs are required to comprise.
Further, given the generality of this requirement, it would mean that a wide range of service providers and
intermediaries, such as cloud based/application layer service providers would also need to maintain localised
system logs in India, even if they do not otherwise have a physical presence in India.
4 Subscriber Data Collection and Retention
Specified entities, namely Data Centres, Virtual Private Server (VPS) providers, cloud service providers (CSPs)
and Virtual Private Network (VPN) providers will be required to record certain information accurately in
relation to its subscribers, similar to the Know Your Customer (KYC) requirement imposed by other sectoral
regulators. This information needs to be maintained for at least five years after the cancellation of the user
registration, or a longer period when mandated by law.
The CERT-In is empowered to call for this information in case of any 'cyber incidents' or 'cyber security
incidents'. The information required to be maintained includes: (i) validated names of subscribers/customers;
(ii) subscription period including dates; (iii) IPs allotted to/being used by the members; (iv) email address, IP
address and time stamps used at the time of registration; (v) purpose for subscribing to the services; (vi)
validated address and contact numbers; and (vii) ownership pattern of the subscribers/customers using
service.
5 Know Your Customer Information and Financial Transaction Record Retention
The 2022 Directions require all ‘virtual asset service providers, virtual asset exchange providers and custodian
wallet providers’ to maintain KYC and financial transaction records. This appears to create a new requirement
for these entities to carry out a KYC function - which was till now only required for entities regulated by Indian
financial service regulators, such as those operating in the banking, securities and insurance sectors. The
retention requirement in this regard is also for a period of five years. While the directions refer to the
definitions by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) for these entities to determine application, there is presently no
guidance from the MoF on these definitions. Apart from being an entirely new obligation, this lack of guidance
will evidently make it difficult to determine which entities will be required to comply with this obligation.
As such, the directions require the retention of identification information of the parties (including IP addresses,
timestamps and time zones), transaction ID, the public keys (or equivalent identifiers), addresses or accounts
involved (or equivalent identifiers), the nature and date of the transaction, and the amount transferred.
2022 CERT-In Directions on Reporting Cyber Incidents Page 2
UPDATES
Financial transaction records must be maintained such that individual transactions can be reconstructed from
them.
6 Synchronised System Clocks
The 2022 Directions require all entities to synchronise ICT system clocks to the Network Time Protocol (NTP)
of the National Informatics Centre (NIC) or National Physical Laboratory (NPL) or with other NTP servers
traceable to those maintained by NIC or NPL. While global entities are permitted to use a different time source
that is in sync with the NTP, they need to ensure that their time source shall not deviate from NPL and NIC.
This may be difficult to practically implement for entities, as the number of such servers maintained by the
NIC are limited, potentially making such syncing unreliable.
7 Penalty
Non-compliance with the 2022 Directions, which would include requests from CERT-In to provide information,
can invite punitive action under Section 70-B(7) of the IT Act, which can extend to imprisonment for up to a
year, and/or a fine upto INR 100,000. Other penal laws, where applicable, may also be invoked in cases of non-
compliance.
Conclusion
The 2022 Directions greatly widen the compliance net for entities in these sectors. The ambiguity with regard to its
scope and applicability, combined with an intention to invoke penal provisions for non-compliance may make
requirements such as six hour reporting, localising system logs and syncing all systems to Indian NTP fairly onerous
for various entities, such as cloud service/storage providers to operate in a legally compliant manner in India.
It is noteworthy that several provisions of the 2022 Directions appear to be in excess of or in deviation from the
provisions of the CERT-In Rules and the IT Act itself, as explained above, and thus the interpretation that will be taken
by the courts and regulators in such cases are yet to be seen. However, both the CERT-In Rules and the 2022
Directions will need to be considered by entities while scoping for compliance. As such, while the directions envisage
an effective date of 60 days from notification, it remains to be seen how the regulator and the industry will respond
to the new regime.
If you require any further information about the material contained in this newsletter, please get in touch with your Trilegal relationship partner
or send an email to alerts@trilegal.com. The contents of this newsletter are intended for informational purposes only and are not in the nature
of a legal opinion. Readers are encouraged to seek legal counsel prior to acting upon any of the information provided herein.
2022 CERT-In Directions on Reporting Cyber Incidents Page 3
